# Command Line

A command-line processor/interpreter uses command-line interface as a means for the user to issues commands to the program in the form of successive lines of text. These commands are in charge of defining environment parameter needed in the invoking executables commands for a program. A program which handles the interface is called a shell.

Operating system (OS) command-line interfaces are usually distinct programs supplied with the operating system. A program that implements such a text interface is often called a command-line interpreter, command processor or shell.

[CLI - wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Command-line_interface)

## anatomy

The general pattern of a command line interface is:

```cli
Prompt command param1 param2 param3 … paramN
```

- Prompt - generated by the program to provide context for the user.

- Command - provided by the user. Commands are usually one of three classes:

  -- Internal commands are recognized and processed by the command line interpreter.

  -- Included commands run separate executables.

  -- External commands run executable files that may be included by other parties.[clarification needed]

param1 …paramN — parameters provided by the user. The format and meaning of the parameters depends upon the command. In the case of Included or External commands, the values of the parameters are delivered to the program as it is launched by the OS. Parameters may be either Arguments or Options.
In this format, the delimiters between command-line elements are whitespace characters and the end-of-line delimiter is the newline delimiter. This is a widely used (but not universal) convention.

A CLI can generally be considered as consisting of **syntax** and **semantics**. The syntax is the grammar that all commands must follow. The semantics define what sort of operations are possible, on what sort of data these operations can be performed, and how the grammar represents these operations and data—the symbolic meaning in the syntax.

A simple CLI will display a prompt, accept a "command line" typed by the user terminated by the Enter key, then execute the specified command and provide textual display of results or error messages. Advanced CLIs will validate, interpret and parameter-expand the command line before executing the specified command, and optionally capture or redirect its output.

The commands given to a CLI shell are often in one of the following forms:

```cli
doSomething how toFiles
doSomething how sourceFile destinationFile
doSomething how < inputFile > outputFile
doSomething how | doSomething how | doSomething how > outputFile
```

where doSomething is, in effect, a verb, how an adverb (for example, should the command be executed "verbosely" or "quietly") and toFiles an object or objects (typically one or more files) on which the command should act. The > in the third example is a redirection operator, telling the command-line interpreter to send the output of the command not to its own standard output (the screen) but to the named file. This will overwrite the file. Using >> will redirect the output and append it to the file. Another redirection operator is the vertical bar (|), which creates a pipeline where the output of one command becomes the input to the next command.

### arugments

A command-line argument or parameter is an item of information provided to a program when it is started. A program can have many command-line arguments that identify sources or destinations of information, or that alter the operation of the program.

#### options

A command-line option or simply option (also known as a flag or switch) modifies the operation of a command; the effect is determined by the command's program.

In Unix-like systems, the ASCII hyphen-minus begins options; the new (and GNU) convention is to use two hyphens then a word (e.g. --create) to identify the option's use while the old convention (and still available as an option for frequently-used options) is to use one hyphen then one letter (e.g., -c); if one hyphen is followed by two or more letters it may mean two options are being specified, or it may mean the second and subsequent letters are a parameter (such as filename or date) for the first option.[16]

Two hyphen-minus characters without following letters (--) may indicate that the remaining arguments should not be treated as options, which is useful for example if a file name itself begins with a hyphen, or if further arguments are meant for an inner command (e.g., sudo). Double hyphen-minuses are also sometimes used to prefix "long options" where more descriptive option names are used. This is a common feature of GNU software. The getopt function and program, and the getopts command are usually used for parsing command-line options.

Unix command names, arguments and options are case-sensitive (except in a few examples, mainly where popular commands from other operating systems have been ported to Unix).

### help

One of the criticisms of a CLI is the lack of cues to the user as to the available actions.[citation needed] In contrast, GUIs usually inform the user of available actions with menus, icons, or other visual cues.[citation needed] To overcome this limitation, many CLI programs display a usage message, typically when invoked with no arguments or one of ?, -?, -h, -H, /?, /h, /H, /Help, -help, or --help.

### command description syntax

angle brackets for required parameters: `ping <hostname>`

square brackets for optional parameters: `mkdir [-p] <dirname>`

ellipses for repeated items: `cp <source1> [source2…] <dest>`

vertical bars for choice of items: `netstat {-t|-u}`
